Require Multi-Perspective Domain Validation (v1) (#6)
ryancdickson/staging: docs/BR.md

**Legal Entity**: An association, corporation, partnership, proprietorship, trust, government entity or other entity with legal standing in a country's legal system.

**Multi-Perspective Domain Validation**: A process by which the determination made during domain validation (see “Primary Domain Validation Determination”) is corroborated from multiple Network Perspectives before subscriber certificate issuance. 

> **Network Perspective**: Related to Multi-Perspective Domain Validation. A configuration for sending outbound Internet traffic associated with a domain control validation method. The location of a Network Perspective is determined by the point where unencapsulated outbound Internet traffic is first handed off to the network infrastructure providing Internet connectivity to that perspective. This infrastructure may be administered by the same organization providing the computational services required to operate the perspective. Network Perspectives are considered distinct when the straight-line distance between the two States or Provinces they reside in are separated by a distance of at least 500 km.

Reviewer: The CABF tries to avoid adding normative requirements within definitions. I recommend moving the last 2 sentences to the normative section that introduces the "Network Perspective" in 3.2.2.9.

Author: Moved as suggested in https://github.com/ryancdickson/staging/commit/622a05eac00be76c1517a5e1feb8a94d62f19c83.

The focus of these two sentences are somewhat unrelated, so each sentence is now its own paragraph. 

Open to feedback on the ordering of the paragraphs!

Author: Trying to clean up issues that were previously addressed. @dzacharo, feel free to re-open if you disagree.

  i. 30 days or
  ii. if the Applicant submitted the Certificate request, the time frame permitted for reuse of validated information relevant to the Certificate (such as in [Section 4.2.1](#421-performing-identification-and-authentication-functions) of these Guidelines or Section 11.14.3 of the EV Guidelines).

> Validations using this method MUST implement Multi-Perspective Domain Validation as specified in Section 3.2.2.9.

Reviewer 2: Replace 'Validations" with 'CAs' for clarity.
```suggestion
CAs using this method MUST implement Multi-Perspective Domain Validation as specified in Section 3.2.2.9.
```

Author: No issues with that.

Applied comment consistently across 3.2.2.X in https://github.com/ryancdickson/staging/commit/e4473a9a483dd1ef00b840155478f89b47c48768

Author: Resolving conversation (content was updated, no comments in response to that update).

@slghtr-says - feel free to re-open if you disagree.

CAs MUST document potential issuances that were prevented by a CAA record in sufficient detail to provide feedback to the CAB Forum on the circumstances, and SHOULD dispatch reports of such issuance requests to the contact(s) stipulated in the CAA iodef record(s), if present. CAs are not expected to support URL schemes in the iodef record other than mailto: or https:.

#### 3.2.2.9 Multi-Perspective Domain Validation

> Multi-Perspective Domain Validation attempts to corroborate the Primary Domain Validation Determination and Primary CAA Determination by re-completing the entirety of the domain validation process from multiple geographic Network Perspectives before subscriber certificate issuance. This process can improve protection against equally-specific prefix Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) attacks or hijacks.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Multi-Perspective Domain Validation attempts to corroborate the Primary Domain Validation Determination and Primary CAA Determination by re-completing the entirety of the domain validation process from multiple additional geographic Network Perspectives before subscriber certificate issuance. This process can improve protection against equally-specific prefix Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) attacks or hijacks.
```
Make it clear the corroborating perspectives must be distinct from the primary perspective.

> Network Perspectives are considered distinct when the straight-line distance between the two States or Provinces they reside in are separated by a distance of at least 500 km.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Network Perspectives are considered distinct when the straight-line distance between the two States, Provinces, or Countries they reside in are separated by a distance of at least 500 km.
```
Some countries don't have States or Provinces.

Author: Thanks for sharing, committing suggestion. 

(Belgium and Israel are such examples).

The network infrastructure providing Internet connectivity to a Network Perspective MAY be administered by the same organization providing the computational services required to operate the Network Perspective. 

> Each Network Perspective MUST independently complete the entirety of the following:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Each primary and corroborating Network Perspective MUST independently complete the entirety of the following:
```
Make it explicit that the primary and corroborating Network Perspectives must be distinct.

- the domain validation process used to establish the Primary Domain Validation Determination (i.e., including DNS lookups for A records), and
- the CAA record-checking process used to establish the Primary CAA Determination. 

Results or information obtained from one Network Perspective MUST NOT be reused or cached when performing validation through subsequent Network Perspectives (e.g., different Network Perspectives cannot rely on a shared DNS cache to prevent an adversary with control of traffic from one Network Perspective from poisoning the DNS cache used by other Network Perspectives).

> [Section 3.2.2.4](#3224-validation-of-domain-authorization-or-control) and [Section 3.2.2.5](#3225-authentication-for-an-ip-address) describe the validation methods that require the use of Multi-Perspective Domain Validation and how a Network Perspective can corroborate the Primary Domain Validation Determination. To corroborate the Primary CAA Determination, a Network Perspective MUST perform a CAA lookup that concludes the CA can issue a certificate to the domain in question.

Reviewer 4: I wanted to comment on thesis lines in light of some of the discussion on the CAB Forum public list. Our team at Princeton does see multi-perspective CAA checking as a core part of multi-perspective domain validation which offers a noticeable security improvement against BGP attacks and attacks that are chained with BGP attacks.

Specifically, CAA allows for a domain to constrain its BGP attack surface to only DNS target IP addresses and avoid attacks posed by vulnerable A-record IP addresses. In the absence of CAA records, an adversary aiming to obtain a misissued certificate for example.com can either launch a BGP attack against an authoritative nameserver for example.com or an IP address pointed to by example.com’s A record (both of these strategies have been seen in the wild). Domains containing CAA records that either 1) specify an account ID, 2) specify validation methods that only rely on DNS or 3) contain no issue (i.e., “issue ;”)  are immune to attacks on A records and can only be hijacked via attacks on DNS infrastructure. We do see all three of these configurations on real TLS domains (https://blog.apnic.net/2023/06/28/whose-certificate-is-it-anyway/). Our data suggests that the DNS attack surface is in fact smaller than the A record attack surface. In the absence of multi-perspective CAA checking this, added security can easily be downgraded as the adversary need only fool the CAA lookup from the CA’s primary perspective.

In addition to reducing the attack surface to equally-specific BGP attacks, we see CAA records as providing security against a broad range of attacks on domain control validation which may unexpectedly arise in the future. Some historical domain validation vulnerabilities that CAA records could have protected a domain against (sampled with no particular intention) include the WoSign any-port behavior (https://wiki.mozilla.org/CA/WoSign_Issues#Issue_L:_Any_Port_.28Jan_-_Apr_2015.29) and the ACME TLS-SNI-01 vulnerability (https://labs.detectify.com/2018/01/12/how-i-exploited-acme-tls-sni-01-issuing-lets-encrypt-ssl-certs-for-any-domain-using-shared-hosting/). Reducing the risk posed by vulnerabilities in domain control validation methods or CAs which a domain does not use to obtain its own certificates is an important benefit of CAA records. If CAA records are not checked from multiple network perspectives, this benefit can easily be undermined. Upon discovering a vulnerable domain control validation practice anywhere in the PKI ecosystem, an adversary can quite easily target a domain with a protecting CAA record by performing a BGP hijack that fools the primary perspective and then exploiting the vulnerable domain control validation procedure to obtain a misissued certificate. In both of these historical examples, multi-perspective domain control validation would have not mitigated these domain control validation vulnerabilities, but multi perspective CAA checking could have caught the BGP attack that was used to evade the security offered by the CAA records.

Furthermore, beyond simply validation practices that were ultimately deemed unacceptable, different validation procedures give the authority to obtain a certificate for a domain to different groups of administrators (or software stacks). Email validation can be completed by mail-server admins and people who respond to admin email addresses, HTTP validation can be completed by web server admins, DNS validation requires DNS server access etc… A large organization can use CAA to allow only specific systems or admins the authority to obtain a certificate. Even if the PKI behaves as intended, this is another security protection that CAA offers which can be more easily downgraded by a BGP attack if CAA records are not checked from multiple perspectives.

In short, CAA offers high-security domains the option of minimizing their attack surface and we feel it is important (particularly for facilitating the continued growth of CAA) this security measure is not easily downgraded.

I do see Dimitris’ point about CAA checks having to be repeated for each subdomain even though several subdomains can be validated under a single DNS validation for a base domain. However, I see this phenomena as largely unrelated to multi-perspective checks and more tied to the CAA parsing behavior which requires CAA to be checked for each subdomain. Even though as Dimitris points out adding multi-perspective CAA checks does cause four times as many CAA checks, these checks can be run in parallel to the primary CAA check to avoid contributing significantly to latency (in fact, with Let’s Encrypt’s implementation remote validation usually resolves faster than primary validation causing no impact to median latency). The 50x increase comes from CAA semantics unrelated to multi-perspective checking.

That said, I still think there might be a way to make multi-perspective CAA checking significantly easier to implement while having a negligible impact on security. Aaron’s response mentioned that due to the time constraints around the finalize order for certificates, multi-perspective CAA checking was only done at validation time (if a CAA record has to be rechecked at issuance time because it expired since domain control validation occurred Let’s Encrypt does not do this recheck from multiple vantage points). I know in principle CAA checking needs to be done before issuance sometimes unassociated with validation as the period of validity for a CAA record check is less than the reuse period for domain control validation. However, I feel that the security would not be sufficiently compromised if multi-perspective CAA checking was simply bundled with multi-perspective domain control validation. I feel this would make implementations easier as the multi-perspective infrastructure would only need to be interacted with once (during validation time) where it could collect corroborating CAA evidence at the same time. If this validation data is then reused to issue a certificate at a later time (after which the CAA record check would be considered stale), only the primary perspective would need to recheck.

Along these lines I propose something like:
```suggestion
[Section 3.2.2.4](#3224-validation-of-domain-authorization-or-control) and [Section 3.2.2.5](#3225-authentication-for-an-ip-address) describe the validation methods that require the use of Multi-Perspective Domain Validation and how a Network Perspective can corroborate the Primary Domain Validation Determination. To corroborate the Primary CAA Determination, a Network Perspective MUST perform a CAA lookup that concludes the CA can issue a certificate to the domain in question. A CA MAY use corroborating evidence for CAA record compliance for a period equal to the period of validity for Validation of Domain Authorization or Control specified in [Section 4.2.1](#421-performing-identification-and-authentication-functions).
```

that specifies CAA corroboration does not need to be checked more often than domain control validation.

| 2  | This configuration relies on two (2) Network Perspectives.<br><br>When this configuration is used, at least one (1) of the Network Perspectives MUST corroborate the Primary Domain Validation Determination and Primary CAA Determination. | This configuration MUST NOT be used after 9/15/2025. |
| 3  | This configuration relies on three (3) Network Perspectives.<br><br>When this configuration is used, at least two (2) of the Network Perspectives MUST corroborate the Primary Domain Validation Determination and Primary CAA Determination.  | This configuration MUST NOT be used after 3/15/2026. |
| 4  | This configuration relies on four (4) Network Perspectives.<br><br>When this configuration is used, at least three (3) of the Network Perspectives MUST corroborate the Primary Domain Validation Determination and Primary CAA Determination. | This configuration MUST NOT be used after 9/15/2026. |
| 5  | This configuration relies on five (5) Network Perspectives.<br><br>When this configuration is used, at least four (4) of the Network Perspectives MUST corroborate the Primary Domain Validation Determination and Primary CAA Determination. | - |

> | 6+ | This configuration relies on six (6) or more (i.e., "N") Network Perspectives.<br><br>When this configuration is used, at least N-2 Network Perspectives MUST corroborate the Primary Domain Validation Determination and Primary CAA Determination. | - |

Reviewer 3: Based on this table, the quorum requirement is 50% for 2 corroborating perspectives, 67% for 3 corroborating perspectives, 75% for 4 corroborating perspectives, 80% for 5 corroborating perspectives, and back down to 67% for 6 corroborating perspectives.

This may push the community towards using 2, 3, or 6 corroborating perspectives instead of 4 or 5 as it allows for a higher tolerance of false negatives. In Google's MPDV implementation, we require 3 out of 5 perspectives to pass. We haven't done a full study of the security/false positive tradeoff, however, we see increased false negatives when increasing the quorum requirement to 4.

Is it possible to require a constant percentage for quorum? For example, 60%. Then the quorum requirements will be 2/2, 2/3, 3/4, 3/5, 4/6, etc.

Author: @geegeea - thanks for this suggestion, a consistent quorum "score" is an interesting idea - and presents an opportunity to simplify the requirements.

I'll study this further to understand the impact of this proposal and will report back.

Reviewer 4: I see the 2, 3 and 4 remote perspectives lines as largely intermediate steps to allow the ecosystem to adjust to this new requirement. In the current draft, none of these lines can be used after 9/15/2026. My understanding is that the 2 collaborating perspective configuration has a 50% quorum simply to offer an easy transition step before quorums increase. Thus, I don’t think there is too much of a push to 2 or 3 corroborating perspectives in the long run and I personally would keep these lines untouched to continue to offer easy transition steps.

As for making the long-term quorum a fixed percent instead of N-2, I think this does make sense. I feel there are pros and cons of each approach. One nice thing with the N-2 quorum is that as perspective counts increase security keeps continuously improving. If a fixed percentage quorum is used, this will always have to be rounded to an integer and this creates slightly lower and higher security perspective counts. On the flip side, some could say the 2-N quorum arguably discourages people from deploying larger perspective counts as while it increases security, false positives may also increase.

I was somewhat delayed answering this as I wanted to run additional data to tell from a security perspective how the 3/5 quorum performed. Overall it is much stronger than not implementing this system all together, but I personally think it does leave some room for improvement that could be capitalized by requiring a 4/5 quorum. Below I list the resilience of the median domain (as defined in our paper https://arxiv.org/pdf/2302.08000.pdf) under different quorum policies with 5 remote perspectives. Resilience can loosely be thought of as the fraction of potential adversaries on the Internet from which a domain is protected against equally-specific BGP attacks. In order to leverage the data available from our paper, I used the Let’s Encrypt vantage points and two optimal expansions we recommended (although I could potentially compute this under different perspective sets if that is of interest).

Primary perspective only (no MPDV): Median Resilience: 0.5411

5 Remote Perspectives Allowing 2 to Fail: Median Resilience: 0.9021

5 Remote Perspectives Allowing 1 to Fail: Median Resilience: 0.9751

5 Remote Perspectives Allowing None to Fail: Median Resilience: 0.9901

I have also attached a domain resilience CDF showing these different scenarios.

I also ran a similar set of simulations for 6 perspective sets with different quorums:

6 Remote Perspectives Allowing 2 to Fail:  Median Resilience: 0.9221

6 Remote Perspectives Allowing 1 to Fail:  Median Resilience: 0.9771

6 Remote Perspectives Allowing None to Fail:  Median Resilience: 0.9921

As @geegeea correctly points out this is a security-usability tradeoff question and while 3/5 offers decent security, stronger security can definitely be achieved with 4/5 and 4/6 remote perspective although this can come at an increased rate of false positives.

I also want to mention that we noticed with Let’s Encrypt there were several ways to significantly reduce false positives. Many false positives are transient due to DNS propagation delays. User retries fixed a large fraction of these issues at Let’s Encrypt. Automatic CA retries can also potentially reduce these false positives. Google Trust Services utilizes a very different infrastructure for performing MPDV than Let’s Encrypt and there may be a different false positive rate associated with this approach (our team at Princeton would be happy to learn more about your deployment experience and share some successful strategies from the Let’s Encrypt deployment). Finally, it may be more forgiving on the false positive count to simply add an additional perspective in a highly-reliable location thus putting the total perspective count at 6 and still allowing 2 failures than to change the quorum to 1 failure with 5 perspectives.
![CDF 5 Perspectives Different Quorum](https://github.com/ryancdickson/staging/assets/1812773/cd252492-c33b-44cb-a63f-106b238e3b0d)

CAs MUST document potential issuances that were prevented by a CAA record in sufficient detail to provide feedback to the CAB Forum on the circumstances, and SHOULD dispatch reports of such issuance requests to the contact(s) stipulated in the CAA iodef record(s), if present. CAs are not expected to support URL schemes in the iodef record other than mailto: or https:.

#### 3.2.2.9 Multi-Perspective Domain Validation

> Multi-Perspective Domain Validation attempts to corroborate the Primary Domain Validation Determination and Primary CAA Determination by re-completing the entirety of the domain validation process from multiple geographic Network Perspectives before subscriber certificate issuance. This process can offer improved protection against equally-specific prefix attacks (i.e., a form of Border Gateway Protocol hijack).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Multi-Perspective Domain Validation attempts to corroborate the Primary Domain Validation Determination and Primary CAA Determination by re-completing the entirety of the domain validation process from multiple geographic Network Perspectives before subscriber certificate issuance. This process can offer improved protection against equally-specific prefix Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) attacks or hijacks.
```

> Network Perspectives MUST be spread across a minimum of two distinct continents. Each Network Perspective MUST independently complete the entirety of:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Each Network Perspective MUST independently complete the entirety of:
```
I don't think this needs to be here, because it is redundant with line 1062.

Reviewer 4: Hi Aaron, based on my interpretation, after March 15, 2025 this line is indeed redundant with 1062. However, before March 15 2025, line 1062 does not take effect (because before March 15 2025 a CA can proceed with issuance regardless of the result of MPDV). Thus, this line (1049) would require the spread of network perspectives across two distinct continents even in logging only mode. Personally I am still OK removing it for the sake of simplicity of the draft, but I did want to point out that I feel it would have a slight change in the interpretation of the requirement.

Reviewer 5: Good catch. But I concur that making the change is good: encourage people to set up MPDV in multiple locations right off the bat.

Author: Accepting comment to reduce the complexity of the initial deployments.

- the domain validation process used to establish the Primary Domain Validation Determination (i.e., including DNS lookups for A records), and
- the CAA record checking process used to establish the Primary CAA Determination. 

Results or information obtained from one Network Perspective MUST NOT be reused or cached when performing validation through subsequent Network Perspectives (e.g., different Network Perspectives cannot rely on a shared DNS cache to prevent an adversary with control of traffic from one Network Perspective from poisoning the DNS cache used by other Network Perspectives).

> In the event that the Primary Domain Validation Determination or Primary CAA Determination is not corroborated as defined in the "# of Network Perspectives and Quorum Requirements" table, CAs MAY immediately retry Multi-Perspective Domain Validation using the same validation method or an alternative method (e.g., a CA can immediately retry validation using “Email to DNS TXT Contact” if “Agreed-Upon Change to Website - ACME” does not corroborate the outcome of Multi-Perspective Domain Validation). There is no stipulation regarding the maximum number of validation attempts that may be performed in any period of time.

Reviewer 5: Replace all smart-quotes (`“/”`) with straight-quotes (`"`), here and elsewhere.

Author: First addressed in https://github.com/ryancdickson/staging/commit/4b0804d2841a3230f56652afbea694ba6c576537 (to cover the smart quotes introduced in this proposal), then went back to address all pre-existing smart quotes in https://github.com/ryancdickson/staging/commit/1eebc1a89473d04f7574745c2e915f4454f241c8.

Phased Implementation Timeline:
- *Effective March 15, 2024*, the CA SHOULD implement Multi-Perspective Domain Validation as described in this section. 
- *Effective September 15, 2024*, the CA MUST implement Multi-Perspective Domain Validation as described in this section; however, the CA MAY proceed with certificate issuance if the Primary Domain Validation Determination is not corroborated as defined in the "# of Network Perspectives and Quorum Requirements" table.

> - *Effective March 15, 2025*, the CA MUST implement Multi-Perspective Domain Validation as described in this section; however, the CA MUST NOT proceed with certificate issuance if the Primary Domain Validation Determination is not corroborated as defined in the "# of Network Perspectives and Quorum Requirements" table and the "Defining Corroborating CAA Evidence" table.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- *Effective March 15, 2025*, the CA MUST implement Multi-Perspective Domain Validation as described in this section. The CA MUST NOT proceed with certificate issuance if the Primary Domain Validation Determination is not corroborated as defined in the "# of Network Perspectives and Quorum Requirements" table and the "Defining Corroborating CAA Evidence" table.
```

Author: Simplifies sentence structure, accepting comment.

> Even though the "# of Network Perspectives and Quorum Requirements" table permits issuance when some Network Perspectives do not corroborate the Primary Domain Validation Determination, the set of Network Perspectives that do corroborate the Primary Domain Validation Determination MUST be spread over two distinct continents for a CA to proceed with certificate issuance after March 15, 2025.

Reviewer 5: I think the language in this section is unclear as to whether it is placing requirements on the _total_ set of network perspectives (where the Primary Domain Validation Determination is made, plus the additional Network Perspectives), or if this section is placing requirements _only_ on the additional Network Perspectives which are attempting to corroborate the Primary Domain Validation Determination.

For example, if my primary (audited) location is in NA, and all of my MPDV additional perspectives are in Europe, does that satisfy the "two continents" requirement? Or do my MPDV additional perspectives themselves need to be in both NA and Europe, regardless of where my primary (audited) location is?

Reviewer 4: That's a great point. My personal preference would be to require the additional MPDV perspectives to be spread across two distinct continents independent of where the original datacenter is. This introduces more spread in the MPDV points and reduces the risk that all of them can be compromised with a single attack.

Reviewer 2: > MUST be spread over two distinct continents for a CA to proceed with certificate issuance after March 15, 2025

This conflicts with (or further constrains) the normative requirements included in the definition of Network Perspectives on L382.

> Related to Multi-Perspective Domain Validation. A configuration for sending outbound Internet traffic associated with a domain control validation method. The location of a Network Perspective is determined by the point where unencapsulated outbound Internet traffic is first handed off to the network infrastructure providing Internet connectivity to that perspective. This infrastructure may be administered by the same organization providing the computational services required to operate the perspective. Network Perspectives are considered distinct when the straight-line distance between the two States or Provinces they reside in are separated by a distance of at least 500 km.

Is this clause even required if by definition network perspectives must be diverse?

Author: @aarongable / @birgelee - I'm not sure I understand the suggested edit. Can you please explain further?

I interpret the following "_...the set of Network Perspectives that do corroborate the Primary Domain Validation Determination MUST be spread over two distinct continents for a CA to proceed with certificate issuance after March 15, 2025_."  .... to satisfy that desired intent (i.e., regardless where the primary determination was made, that determination must be corroborated by perspectives spanning at least 2 distinct continents.)

@slghtr-says - I believe the intent of two distinct continents in addition to the 500km separation is to improve resistance to what might be considered "regional" BGP attacks. I'll leave it to @birgelee or another member of the Princeton Team to serve as the authoritative source for this justification.

Reviewer 4: Based on the results of our research, I support the inclusion of both the 500km separation and the two-continent requirement. I see neither of them as fundamental to the definition of a Network Perspective (so I support moving all of this text out of the definition section), but I think they are both valuable normative requirements.

The 500km separation is to prevent highly redundant perspectives towards counting a CA's total perspective count. I do not think two servers in the same datacenter should count as different network perspectives although one could potentially argue that they hand off traffic to the network at different physical locations (say rack 12 and rack 13). I see the goal of the 500km requirement to force the network perspectives to different major metropolitan areas where they will be interconnected with different IXPs, have different peers/providers, and receive different route tables.

However, we also see a noticeable signal from network perspectives spread across different continents. The optimal sets of network perspectives calculated in our paper quite consistently contain a mixture of European, North American, and Asian perspectives. This is because adding many perspectives in the same continent leads to diminishing returns, and there are continent-level trends we see on BGP attack propagation (these arise due to regional providers that connect to several IXPs in the same region and factors like the IGP metric in BGP route tie breaking that avoid slow/expensive trans-continental fiber cables).

Overall we do want perspectives spread across continents, but I think moving solely to a continent-only diversity requirement is a loss. With modest perspective counts (e.g., 5) and requiring each perspective to be on a separate continent, one quickly runs out of richly-connected continents. Poorly connected regions are actually not good locations for perspectives as they are less likely to be close to legitimate domains, and they are more likely to get almost their entire route table from a major global provider which reduces the diversity they offer. If we simply required spread over say 2 continents without any requirement for diversity within a continent, we loose the additional diversity that is gained by spreading perspectives across different metropolitan areas.

With this in mind, the combination of diversity within a continent (enforced by the 500km separation requirement) and spread across two different continents effectively enforces perspective diversity in a way that is supported by our research.

Reviewer 2: Thanks! While I can certainly reason about it in a "you know it when you see it" kind of way I am still unclear on what a formal definition of "distinct continent" actually looks like? Wikipedia suggests that multiple models are used around the world to define continents but I have not been able to locate a definition in another standard that we could insert as a reference. Are you are aware of one or have any suggestions for one? 

@birgelee / @ryancdickson - Would it be clearer (from a requirements perspective) to instead increase the minimum straight-line distance between States or Provinces to 750km or 1000km? Would that provide similar levels of increased resistance to "regional" BGP attacks?

That said, if we are able to formally define what a distinct continent is then I would suggest formally making the requirement read _at least 2 distinct continents_ (as casually mentioned in the comments).

```suggestion
Even though the "# of Network Perspectives and Quorum Requirements" table permits issuance when some Network Perspectives do not corroborate the Primary Domain Validation Determination, the set of Network Perspectives that do corroborate the Primary Domain Validation Determination MUST be spread over at least two distinct continents for a CA to proceed with certificate issuance after March 15, 2025.
```

Based on that framing I better understand that this language does not preclude multiple additional perspectives being on the same continent (or alternatively across 3 or more continents) as long as the entirety of the set used for corroboration meets both the geographic distance requirement and the diversity requirement.

Reviewer 3: > That's a great point. My personal preference would be to require the additional MPDV perspectives to be spread across two distinct continents independent of where the original datacenter is. This introduces more spread in the MPDV points and reduces the risk that all of them can be compromised with a single attack.

It is unclear to me the security benefit achieved by placing this requirement only on the corroborating perspectives vs. the total set of network perspectives. Rather, it may be more secure to impose this requirement on the total set of perspectives. For example, if a CA is using 2 alternate perspectives , then only 1  is needed to succeed based on the below table. In that case, if the primary is in North America, and the corroborating perspectives are in Europe (not meeting the current requirement), then a single attack can compromise all the European perspectives, but the primary perspective will still catch it. On the other hand, if the primary and 1 alternate perspective are in Europe (meeting the current requirement), then a single attack can compromise overall domain validation. So, meeting the above requirement forces a less secure configuration.

Reviewer 4: Good points. I am aware of the continent definition debate. Generally my understanding is that it largely has to do with deciding the number of continents so specifying a set of continents by name (say something like spread across the continents Europe, Asia, Africa ... ) could potential resolve it. I do agree with you on the point about there being relatively little precedence for continent definitions in other technical standards.

I personally do not really like simply increasing the straight-line distance requirement, as I think it starts making some vantage points that actually contribute valuable diversity not count towards a CA's total vantage point count and it still doesn't fully force people into different global regions even at more aggressive values like 1000km. Three perspectives could still be located all in the continental US but spread over 1000km each.

I think a potential clean solution that draws upon well established administrative boundaries and presents several extra security benefits is based on an idea @dzacharo mentioned a while back. Regional Internet Registries (RIRs) are already well established in the Internet governance space and have well defined service regions ( https://www.nro.net/about/rirs/ ) which largely map to the different connectivity regions in the Internet. Personally I think this actually outperforms the continent model because of subtleties like Australia getting grouped with Asia (much of its Internet traffic is routed through Asia although it is usually considered a distinct continent) and Siberia getting grouped with the rest of Russia. Furthermore, as @dzacharo pointed out, different RIRs are known to have different adoption levels of BGP security measures (see https://rpki-monitor.antd.nist.gov/ which can be filtered by RIR at the top). Requiring successful perspectives in these different regions reduces the likelihood that a CA will use entirely perspectives from a single region that has an abnormally low adoption of BGP security measures.

I think the one caveat with a definition based on RIRs is to make sure to clarify that we are referring to perspectives being located in the geographic regions being served by those RIRs, not necessarily operating out of address space allocated by those different RIRs. For example, Amazon is a US company and has large address blocks allocated by ARIN but these blocks are carved up and BGP routed to different data centers around the world. I think an AWS deployment based on data centers in various regions that fall under different RIRs is acceptable because each data center is using local providers and peers in that region for its Internet connectivity (even though if you run whois on the source IP of these different vantage points it will always come back as ARIN).

Putting this all together (and using the language @slghtr-says recommended) I think a definition along the lines of this would make sense:

```suggestion
Even though the "# of Network Perspectives and Quorum Requirements" table permits issuance when some Network Perspectives do not corroborate the Primary Domain Validation Determination, the set of locations of the Network Perspectives that do corroborate the Primary Domain Validation Determination MUST full within the service regions of at least two distinct regional Internet registries for a CA to proceed with certificate issuance after March 15, 2025.
```

Reviewer 4: @geegeea 

I think a key factor on the total perspective vs corroborating perspectives topic is actually the effective date of this requirement, which, upon reading your response, I realized I made a mistake with that may have caused some confusion. My original intention for this requirement was for it to only apply to row 2 (i.e., the row that starts with 3 network perspectives used) and below on the table “# of Network Perspectives and Quorum Requirements.” Thus, I should have written the effective date as 9/15/2025. I did not notice that from March to September 2025, row  1 of the table would still be in effect.

For the scenario you described, I concur that it is better to enforce the requirement based on total not remote perspectives. However, as I explained above I was not thinking about this requirement being enforced on the 1 of 2 perspective configuration (where it's probably better to spread the single corroborating perspective and the primary data center across different regions). Assume we are on the 2 out of 3 row and there is a North-American CA. Under the “total perspectives spread over two regions” requirement, North America would already be covered by the primary perspective and this CA could potentially place all three of its perspectives in the same region (say Europe). While I don’t think this is atrocious as the primary perspective is still in North America, I feel it would be optimal to enforce the requirement on the corroborating network perspectives in this situation as now the CA would have to put at least one of the three network perspectives in a different region.

Also, even if the CA chooses to put one corroborating network perspective in North America and two in Europe, I still think this would be preferable to placing all corroborating network perspectives in Europe as 1) I expect corroborating network perspectives and primary perspectives to have significantly different BGP routing as corroborating perspectives can be run in the cloud while primary perspectives cannot. Thus, there is value to having a primary and a corroborating network perspective in the same region since they can still catch attacks the other missed and 2) we are requiring RPKI ROV for the corroborating perspectives but not the primary perspective. Thus, the corroborating network perspectives offer an advantage over the primary perspective in detecting BGP attacks as they are significantly less likely to use a route that is RPKI invalid. I think it is quite valuable to have an ROV enforcing perspective perform the domain control validation check in each region. Thus, it is still useful to have an ROV enforcing corroborating perspective recheck a region even if the primary domain control validation (which may not use ROV) has already occurred there.

```suggestion
Even though the "# of Network Perspectives and Quorum Requirements" table permits issuance when some Network Perspectives do not corroborate the Primary Domain Validation Determination, the set of locations of the Network Perspectives that do corroborate the Primary Domain Validation Determination MUST full within the service regions of at least two distinct regional Internet registries for a CA to proceed with certificate issuance after September 15, 2025.
```

Table: # of Network Perspectives and Quorum Requirements

| Minimum # of Network Perspectives that MUST corroborate the Primary Domain Validation Determination and Primary CAA Determination | Maximum # of Network Perspectives that MAY NOT corroborate the Primary Domain Validation Determination and Primary CAA Determination | Description |
|---|---|---|
| 1 | 1 | This configuration MUST NOT be used after 9/15/2025. |
| 3 | 1 | This configuration MUST NOT be used after 9/15/2026. |
| 4 | 2 | N/A |

> | N-2 | 2 | When the number of Network Perspectives used (i.e., “N”) is greater than or equal to (>=) six (6), a maximum of two (2) Network Perspectives MAY disagree with the Primary Domain Validation Determination. |

Reviewer 5: I had to read this three times to realize why this row is talking about "6" (it's because the previous row documents 6 total perspectives: 4 which corroborate, and 2 which may disagree). I think this table would be helped by having a new left-most column with the total number of network perspectives.

Reviewer 4: Just to transfer over a conversation from the google doc: Wayne Thayer mentioned that the leftmost column (which was originally in the table containing total number of perspectives) could be misinterpreted to be limiting the total number of perspectives a CA had deployed, not just how many they were using for that particular MPDV process. The resolution Ryan went with was to delete the total column, but I too had to read this table several times to interpret it correctly.

Reviewer 5: That makes sense. I personally think labeling the column "# Network Perspectives used" would obviate that confusion as well.

Reviewer: Indeed, it is hard to read this table. The column "Description" only provides a description for the last row but perhaps it would be best to serve as an explainer for the specific configuration. The effective configurations should be moved to a new column?

Author: @dzacharo / @aarongable / @birgelee  - Would something this like be more helpful?

| # Network Perspectives used | Description of Configuration and Quorum Requirements | Permitted Use |
|--- |------------------------------ |------------------------------ |
| 2  | This configuration relies on two (2) Network Perspectives.<br><br>When this configuration is used, at least one (1) of the Network Perspectives MUST corroborate the Primary Domain Validation Determination and Primary CAA Determination. | This configuration MUST NOT be used after 9/15/2025. |
| 3  | This configuration relies on three (3) Network Perspectives.<br><br>When this configuration is used, at least two (2) of the Network Perspectives MUST corroborate the Primary Domain Validation Determination and Primary CAA Determination.  | This configuration MUST NOT be used after 9/15/2025. |
| 4  | This configuration relies on four (4) Network Perspectives.<br><br>When this configuration is used, at least three (3) of the Network Perspectives MUST corroborate the Primary Domain Validation Determination and Primary CAA Determination. |This configuration MUST NOT be used after 9/15/2026. |
| 5  | This configuration relies on five (5) Network Perspectives.<br><br>When this configuration is used, at least four (4) of the Network Perspectives MUST corroborate the Primary Domain Validation Determination and Primary CAA Determination. | This configuration MUST NOT be used after 9/15/2025. |
| 6+ | This configuration relies on six (6) or more (i.e., "N") Network Perspectives.<br><br>When this configuration is used, at least N-2 Network Perspectives MUST corroborate the Primary Domain Validation Determination and Primary CAA Determination. | - |

(Pushed in https://github.com/ryancdickson/staging/commit/9dd72d52e0fb966e2ba17b3930fa5a3fe651c9a3)

Author: Just noticed my dates in the last column got mixed up, now fixed (Sorry!).

> Table: Defining Corroborating Domain Validation Evidence

Reviewer 5: It would make me really happy if this table could disappear, and each definition of "corroborating evidence" be moved into the descriptions of each DCV method themselves. Maybe something like
```
##### 3.2.2.4.19 Agreed-Upon Change to Website - ACME
Confirming the Applicant's control over a FQDN by validating domain control of the FQDN using the ACME HTTP

<snip>

Validations using this method MUST implement Multi-Perspective Domain Validation as specified in Section 3.2.2.9. To count as corroborating, a Network Perspective MUST observe the same token (as defined in RFC 8555) as the Primary Domain Validation Determination.
```

Author: Attempted to move forward with the recommended approach in https://github.com/ryancdickson/staging/commit/cafdfc61365b962f7f88608009456af58ec7e123. Your feedback is appreciated.

While "spreadsheets are my love language" - I agree, there were too many tables.

Author: @aarongable - nudge. Would you consider the updated approach an improvement over the original (table-based format)?

Reviewer 5: 👍🏻 Yeah I like this better, I just don't appear to have the ability to click the "Resolve" button on comments.

| Domain Validation Method | Description of Corroborating Evidence |
|---|---|
| DNS Change (defined in 3.2.2.4.7) | This method involves observing changes to DNS.<br><br>“Corroborate” means the corresponding challenge information (e.g., Random Value or Request Token) MUST be observed by the required number of Network Perspectives defined in the "# of Network Perspectives and Quorum Requirements" table, otherwise the certificate MUST NOT be issued. |

> | IP Address (defined in 3.2.2.4.8) | This method involves observing A or AAAA records in DNS.<br><br>“Corroborate” means an IP address controlled by the applicant in accordance with Section 3.2.2.5 MUST be observed by the required number of Network Perspectives defined in the "# of Network Perspectives and Quorum Requirements" table, otherwise the certificate MUST NOT be issued. The observed IP address controlled by the applicant does not need to be the same across various Network Perspectives. |

Reviewer 2: I don't understand what this means and at-face sounds contradictory to the MPDV goal: 
> The observed IP address controlled by the applicant does not need to be the same across various Network Perspectives.

Suggest removing it or adding more clarity 

```suggestion
| IP Address (defined in 3.2.2.4.8) | This method involves observing A or AAAA records in DNS.<br><br>“Corroborate” means an IP address controlled by the applicant in accordance with Section 3.2.2.5 MUST be observed by the required number of Network Perspectives defined in the "# of Network Perspectives and Quorum Requirements" table, otherwise the certificate MUST NOT be issued. |
```

Author: Moved from the table into 3.2.2.4.8, which now reads "_CAs using this method MUST implement Multi-Perspective Domain Validation as specified in Section 3.2.2.9. To count as corroborating, a Network Perspective MUST observe the same IP address as the Primary Domain Validation Determination._"

IIRC, @birgelee originally included this to suggest that it wasn't necessary to observe the same IP address from _all_ perspectives, just that the ultimately relied upon IP Address must have been observed from the minimum # of perspectives defined by the quorum policy. 

I think the update achieves both goals (improve clarity + make it clear that not all perspectives have to match).

Reviewer 4: I added this line to cover the case where an applicant would like to validate a domain using the method but is using geographic load balancing at a DNS level. Presume the applicant controls 4 different IP addresses that are used in geographic load balancing and are all served as A records for the applicant's domain. However, which A record is served depends on the geographic location where the DNS lookup originated. Even though each network perspective may see a different A record for the domain being validated, if the applicant has demonstrated control over all of the A records via a method in 3.2.2.5, I think the domain should be successfully validated. Maybe there is a clearer way to specify this. I also think that this sentence may not be needed as the previous statement never specifically requires that all network perspectives see the same IP address.

Author: I think we've resolved this issue.

@slghtr-says - please reopen if you disagree.

| Reverse Address Lookup (defined in 3.2.2.5.3) | This method involves a DNS lookup to obtain information about which domain is associated with an IP address.<br><br>“Corroborate” means the domain name retrieved via the reverse DNS lookup MUST be observed by the required number of Network Perspectives defined in the "# of Network Perspectives and Quorum Requirements" table, otherwise the certificate MUST NOT be issued.
| ACME “http-01” method for IP Addresses (defined in 3.2.2.5.6) | This method involves observing changes to website content<br><br>“Corroborate” means the corresponding challenge information (e.g., Random Value or Request Token) MUST be observed by the required number of Network Perspectives defined in the "# of Network Perspectives and Quorum Requirements" table, otherwise the certificate MUST NOT be issued. |
| ACME “tls-alpn-01” method for IP Addresses (defined in 3.2.2.5.7) | This method involves establishing a TLS connection.<br><br>

> “Corroborate” means the corresponding challenge information (e.g., Random Value or Request Token) MUST be observed by the required number of Network Perspectives defined in the "# of Network Perspectives and Quorum Requirements" table, otherwise the certificate MUST NOT be issued. |

Reviewer: This line should be merged with L1089.

Author: Thanks! Fixed in https://github.com/ryancdickson/staging/commit/6e3d36a99846ba795ce65b05ac3b696658c20949.

Likely will try to re-factor the language further such that we can eliminate this table, as proposed in an earlier comment by Aaron.

Author: Table is eliminated as a result of https://github.com/ryancdickson/staging/commit/cafdfc61365b962f7f88608009456af58ec7e123.

Table: Defining Corroborating CAA Evidence

| CAA Method | Description of Corroborating Evidence |
|---|---|
| Any method | “Corroborate” means the required number of Network Perspectives defined in the "# of Network Perspectives and Quorum Requirements" table MUST have CAA lookup results that permit issuance for the domain in question. |

> Computing systems performing Multi-Perspective Domain Validation:

Reviewer 5: Isn't "Computing systems performing MPDV" just a synonym for "Network Perspectives"?

Reviewer 6: I understood the "Network Perspectives" to refer to the different network locations from where the validation data is obtained i.e. DNS query is made, whereas the "Computing systems performing MPDV" would be the machines and/or services used to make the query.

Author: ^ Intent of the language is as described by @dkluge (define minimum security requirements for the hosts running the perspectives).

Author: [Closing stale thread, clarification shared.]

@aarongable, feel free to re-open if you disagree.

    - Network Hardening
      - Configure each network boundary control (firewall, switch, router, gateway, or other network control device or system) with rules that support only the services, protocols, ports, and communications identified as necessary to its operations.
    - System Hardening
      - Disable all accounts, applications, services, protocols, and ports that are not used.
      - Implement multi-factor authentication for all user accounts.
    - Vulnerability Detection and Patch Management
      - Implement intrusion detection and prevention controls to protect against common network and system threats.
      - Document and follow a vulnerability correction process that addresses the identification, review, response, and remediation of vulnerabilities.
      - Undergo or perform a Vulnerability Scan at least every 3 months.
      - Undergo a Penetration Test on at least an annual basis
      - Apply recommended security patches within six (6) months of the security patch’s availability, unless the CA documents that the security patch would introduce additional vulnerabilities or instabilities that outweigh the benefits of applying the security patch.

> 

Reviewer: Although I understand the semantics of SHALL and SHOULD, this style of linking requirements with SHALL/SHOULD is not used anywhere else in the document and does not form complete sentences. I have no strong feelings about this but it's not a style I've seen in other standards.

Author: Open to feedback from others on this topic.

I generally find bulleted lists more readable than paragraphs, and thought this format would be easier for CA owners to consume. Understandably, not everyone shares this same preference.

> Beyond the above considerations, computing systems performing Multi-Perspective Domain Validation are considered outside of the audit scope described in Section 8 of this Policy.

Reviewer: Also, to Aaron's [point](https://github.com/ryancdickson/staging/pull/6/files#r1224913856), we should replace "computing systems performing Multi-Perspective Domain Validation" with just "Network Perspectives".

If the "computing systems" element needs to be included in the "Network Perspective" concept, we should update the definition.

Reviewer 4: I am fine with the change here from "computing systems performing Multi-Perspective Domain Validation" to "Network Perspective," but I think some tweaking of the definition of "Network Perspective" is needed. Specifically a "Network Perspective" is defined as "A configuration for sending outbound Internet traffic..." I think it is somewhat strange to thing about these requirements like a penetration test being enforced on a configuration. Maybe to resolve this we could update the first line of the "Network Perspective" definition to read "A system for sending outbound Internet traffic..."

> 

Reviewer: This sentence implies that the "above considerations" MUST be within the audit scope described in Section 8, i.e. require WebTrust for CAs or ETSI audits from Network Perspectives. If these Network Perspectives are hosted by a Delegated Third Party cloud provider, I don't think the intent is to enforce these DTPs to go through a WebTrust or ETSI audit.

The CA must be able to obtain certifications and/or some form of assurance that these "above considerations" are followed by a third party hosting each Network Perspective, to satisfy these requirements.

How about:

> If any of the above considerations are performed by a Delegated Third Party, the CA MAY obtain certifications and/or some form of assurances from the Delegated Third Party that one or more of the above considerations are followed. 

> Delegated Third Parties need not be within the audit scope described in Section 8 of these Requirements, to satisfy the above considerations.

Author: Any issues with: "_If any of the above considerations are performed by a Delegated Third Party, the CA MAY obtain reasonable evidence from the Delegated Third Party to ascertain assurance that one or more of the above considerations are followed. Delegated Third Parties are not required to be within the audit scope described in Section 8 of these Requirements to satisfy the above considerations._"

"Reasonable evidence" seems simpler (to me) than trying to describe what that evidence might/should look like. We also use the concept of "reasononable" elsewhere in the BRs.

Pushed in https://github.com/ryancdickson/staging/commit/e9d7c8996f3cbf9f406f82b8374ef4dc235d0b76

   4. Issuance of Certificates; 
   5. Generation of Certificate Revocation Lists; and 
   6. Signing of OCSP Responses (as described in [Section 4.9](#49-certificate-revocation-and-suspension) and [Section 4.10](#410-certificate-status-services)).
   7. Multi-Perspective Domain Validation attempts from each Network Perspective, minimally recording the following information:
      - an identifier that uniquely identifies the perspective used
      - the attempted domain name
      - the domain validation method used

>       - the result of the attempt (i.e., whether it corroborates both the primary CAA and domain validation determinations)

Reviewer 5: It feels like this is saying two different things. I generally interpret "result" to mean "DCV pass/fail" or "CAA allow/disallow". But the parenthetical seems to define "result" as "corroborate/disagree". Which do we prefer?

Notably, if audit logs are being generated directly by systems which are performing MPDV, they probably don't _know_ whether they're corroborating or not, because at the time they get their result they don't know whether the Primary Domain Validation Determination has succeeded or not.

Reviewer: The domain validation method used is captured in another existing requirement (Section 3.2.2.4: "CAs SHALL maintain a record of which domain validation method, including relevant BR version number, they used to validate every domain.").

I agree with Aaron and want to highlight that each Network Perspective acts independently of each other. The only meaningful logging from each Network Perspective would be an identifier (first bullet), the attempted domain name (second bullet), the requested type (DNS record or file downloaded) and the value obtained for each request. That would significantly increase the logging volume for CAs.

Alternatively, the CA could log the result of the corroboration based on the "Network Perspectives and Quorum Requirements" table, and capture:
- the identifiers that uniquely identify the perspectives used
- the attempted Domain Name
- the corroboration result (2 out of 3, 3 out of 3, 2 out of 4, etc.)

Author: It looks like this comment thread is split (not sure why). There's an additional comment from Henry [below](https://github.com/ryancdickson/staging/pull/6#issuecomment-1587502611).

Attempted to rephrase to foster continued discussion:

7. Multi-Perspective Domain Validation attempts from each Network Perspective, minimally recording the following information:
      - an identifier that uniquely identifies the perspective used
      - the attempted domain name
      - the result of the attempt (i.e., "DCV pass/fail, CAA allow/disallow")
 
8. Multi-Perspective Domain Validation quorum results for each attempted domain name represented in a Certificate request (i.e., "3/4" which should be interpreted as "3 out of 4 attempted Network Perspectives corroborated the Primary Domain Validation Determination and Primary CAA Determination).

Goals: 
- Clarify the expected result of an attempt
- Clarify that CAs should log a summary of the quorum results
- Ensure data is available to help failure analysis.
